قرآن يتلى في قلعة الشيوعية.. قصص وأرقام حول إقبال الكوبيين على الإسلام

HAVANA TIMES – Abu Duyanah, (Manzanillo, 1984) a Cuban writer, poet, literary critic and journalist, converted to Islam in 2010. He is the president of the Cuban Association for the Diffusion of Islam, made up of groups on the island which are trying to conserve the most orthodox teachings of Islam, something that has resulted in abuse and persecution by the Cuban government’s religious authorities and officials.
What is the Islamic landscape in Cuba like, after 30 years with a Muslim presence?
Islam in Cuba is always changing, it is never easy, but we have managed some good things for our community, in spite of the Government’s resistance.
HT: What have you achieved for example, and what do you mean by resistance?
Abu Duyanah: Thanks to Allah, we have managed to have a presence in every province and on the Isle of Youth. Some of our brothers and sisters have left Cuba to study in Islamic countries and others have gone to holy places in Saudi Arabia. And, this all began after we founded the Cuban Association for the Diffusion of Islam in 2012.
This doesn’t mean to say that we have done all of these things, but when we haven’t been directly involved, we have had an influence, placed pressure, so to speak. Here, many people have made it their business to make Muslims believe that they will never be able to go to Mecca to make the pilgrimage or to study, and we managed to get some members of our group to go and do both of these things.
In 2008, the Government created the poorly-named Cuban Islamic League, which is an organization to control Islam and prevent it from spreading. However, what happened was that after we proved that it was possible to go and study and make the pilgrimage, the Islamic League began to do the same thing, with the government’s full support of course. I imagine that somebody from the State pulled on the president of the League’s ears.
With regard to the Government resistance we face, it’s the same that every Cuban who isn’t a Communist faces.
HT: What is the Cuban Islamic League?
AD: The Cuban Islamic League was created (allegedly) so as to bring together, serve and represent Muslims in Cuba, but up until now, not a single one of three objectives has been fulfilled. They aren’t aware of Muslims’ problems, especially if they come on behalf of the government. They don’t accept Muslims within their ranks and they don’t have a single foreign Muslim on their payroll, so to speak.
There are two things we need to bear in mind: first of all, it is an organization that is registered as part of Cuba’s Church Council, and in the introduction to the statutes of Cuba’s Church Council, it says that it was created to recognize and worship Jesus, and this is something that goes against the very principles of Islam.
 Abu Duyanah
It doesn’t make any sense for an Islamic organization to belong to a Christian organization, but these are the things that are happening in the shadows of a Government that denies human beings their most basic rights.
On the other hand, the Office of Religious Affairs was created, which belongs to the Communist Party’s Central Committee. Thus, we can deduce that the League was conceived to brush Muslims aside, in the best of cases. A group of Communists telling a Muslim how to practice their faith is completely inconceivable. To put it in simpler terms: the League is a government tool, a puppet of Communism.
HT: Is there a division between Sunni and Shia Muslims in Cuba? How do they interact with Cuban society?
AD: There is a division, but that happens all over the world, and not only with Muslims. There are divisions between Hindus, Christians, Buddhists, Jews, Communists, and in every religion and lifestyle on this planet. In Cuba, each group, Sunnis and Shias I mean, does their own thing. But, on a personal level, we get on with Shias very well and we always advocate for a healthy and peaceful coexistence.
The thing is, here in Cuba, good people from both groups make a great effort to prevent perverse characters from sowing any kind of discord. We are aware that more than one Muslim would like to turn Cuba into the next Syria or Iraq, and that’s something that wouldn’t be good for us, and I personally believe that Cuba needs a change, it needs to come out of this rut.
With regard to our interaction with society, we do everything we can, we are always willing to contribute to what is good and we are always ready to teach about Islam. The biggest problem we have in this regard is that people are afraid of getting involved “in things that might bring them problems”. Cubans need to defend the truth, they need to learn to defend what is good and stand up to what is bad, for our collective wellbeing and the wellbeing of our nation. And, there are many bad things here in Cuba.
HT: I understand that you don’t recognize the mosque in Old Havana.
AD: That’s a complicated matter. There isn’t a mosque in Cuba, despite the Government and the League claiming that there is. A mosque is a place that promotes Islam and the wellbeing of Muslims. It is a sacred place, built as Allah’s home. It should never be a place where Muslims or Islam are attacked or harmed. A mosque should never be built by Islam’s enemies, nor should it be built to glorify any human being, or political/ideological regime.
In 2015, the Arab Museum belonging to the Historian’s Office in Old Havana, was extended to the pavement opposite, where the Car Museum once stood; this is where the so-called Abdala Mosque now stands, but it is a place that doesn’t meet the most basic requirements to be considered as such.
Let me tell you that back in the Prophet’s day, Islam’s enemies, from a group of people who said they were Muslims, built a place and wanted it to be considered a mosque. Allah revealed in the Quran that this wasn’t really a mosque and the Prophet ordered that it be razed to the ground.
This place in Old Havana belongs to the Government, its administrator is a member of the Communist Party, who was put there by the Arab Museum, and everything that happens there suits the Government’s interests. You can’t talk about Islam freely there and pro-government propaganda is disseminated. It was built and renovated by workers who weren’t Muslims, despite there being Muslim engineers, architects, designers, bricklayers and restorers in Cuba, as well as many devote followers of Islam. I’m telling you, Cuba doesn’t have a mosque. This is just one of the many spectacles the Government puts on to make it look like religious freedom is respected in Cuba.
 Abu Duyanah
HT: And to finish off, did the Government have anything to do with you stepping down as your group’s leader in 2015?
AD: That’s a tough question. We Muslims suffer from the stigma of terrorism and this is something that we find very hard to disprove, especially because Cuba has suffered a lot of terrorism. In 2014, we were accused of belonging to Iraq’s Islamic State, can you believe that.
Government officials are always putting pressure on anyone who isn’t Communist, but in this case, it was I who insisted that my group find a new leader because I was expecting twins and they were going to be born, and this isn’t a game here. Plus, I know that there are many brothers in my group who are ready to guide us.
On the other hand, Communism and Islam are incompatible in many aspects, but that isn’t as important as the fact that both Communists and Muslims here on the island are Cubans and we live in Cuba, an island surrounded by water. We would like both groups to be able to coexist one day without fear of being persecuted, attacked, or wiped out by the other. We especially believe that Cuba would be a better country if religious followers were able to take part in the national project. There is too much of a witch hunt here in Cuba, covered up in legal processes and bureaucracy.
Jose Marti, who I believe to be the best Cuban intellectual when it comes to a national project, said: “An irreligious people will die, because nothing in it encourages virtue. Human injustices offend virtue; it is necessary that heavenly justice guarantee it.” And, Marti was a man who studied Islam in great detail.

anta Clara, Cuba - "Documents printed" reads a handwritten sign hanging outside the first floor of a house on the outskirts of Santa Clara, a university town in central Cuba.
Hassan Jan, 43, runs his makeshift printing shop from the front room of his home - part of a once-airy villa, now divided into four small dwellings, and surrounded by Soviet-style apartment blocks.
In the front room, which is separated from the rest of his house by a curtain, is a sofa, two chairs, a fish tank with goldfish and Hassan's slow, noisy printer. Louvred windows do little to keep out the heat.
This kind of home-run micro-business has become common since Cuba relaxed its laws on self-employment in 2008.
A front room in a home will often double up as a telephone repair centre, barber shop or hair salon, whatever the neighbourhood needs. Hassan charges 1 Cuban peso ($.04) per sheet and rarely earns more than $1 a day. It's just enough for him to support his wife Shabana and their two children.
It's a young community ... Muslims from abroad have been and still are a determining factor in the creation and development of the Cuban communities.
Hajji Isa, Cuban convert
Hassan, who has a dark beard and clear blue eyes, wears a dishdasha, the long white garment worn in many Muslim countries and a white head-covering. Beside an ornate 19th century clock on the wall above the computer hangs a photograph of Masjid al-Haram, the Sacred Mosque of Mecca.
Hassan and Shabana belong to a small but growing number of Cubans who have converted to Islam, or, as they put it, "accepted Islam".
There are believed to be only a few thousand Muslims in Cuba, an officially secular, but largely Catholic country. The majority are foreign students or workers. Hajji Isa, formerly Jorge Elias Gil Viant, a Cuban convert and artist, and former librarian with the Arab-Cuba Union, a cultural organisation based in Havana, estimates that there are about 1,000 Cuban Muslims, both converts and descendants of Muslim immigrants.
"It's a young community," he says. "Muslims from abroad have been and still are a determining factor in the creation and development of the Cuban communities ... Muslim students from African, Western Saharan, Yemen, Palestine and other Arab countries were a big influence in the 1990s, then later many from Pakistan."
This, according to Isa, has meant that the small Muslim communities across the island have different characteristics, shaped by those who originally influenced them and local circumstances. As the number of Muslim converts grows, however, people are becoming more aware of Islam as a religion that's also practised by Cubans. Small businesses, such as Hassan's, help to bring more Cubans into contact with Muslims and also support the growth of the community.
"This has been a new field for Muslims and has helped them economically and to be able to support Muslim brothers," Isa says.

Hassan Jan, 43, a Cuban Muslim convert runs a small printing business from his home [Sylvia Hines/Al Jazeera]

The front of Hassan Jan's house where he prints documents in Santa Clara [Sylvia Hines/Al Jazeera]
ALSO READ: Game over: Havana through the eyes of two food vendors
Discovering Islam
Hassan's path to Islam was an unexpected one.
Born Froilan Reyes, he had no religious leanings while growing up.
"I was brought up in the Cuban system," he says. "I'd never even been in a church." 
A fun-loving party-goer, he worked as an audio technician at the University of Medical Sciences in Santa Clara and also did regular evening stints as a DJ.

My Cuba - Regla Gonzalez Miro: Rumba Roots
This all changed in 2010 during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan when he was required to work with a group of Pakistani medical students studying at the university.
In 2005, an earthquake in Pakistan-administered Kashmir killed more than 86,000 people and left an estimated 2.5 million homeless.
Within a week, Cuba sent more than 2,000 doctors and other medical specialists to help the earthquake affected areas. The following year, it offered 1,000 scholarships for young people from across Pakistan. 
Nearly 300 of them were placed at the university where Hassan was working. 
Initially, Hassan avoided them.
"People spoke badly of the Muslims, called them terrorists, that sort of thing," he says.
Then he was assigned to look after the audio requirements for the students' prayers during Ramadan, and was with them from 2pm until 2am every day. 
"At first I was very uncomfortable," he admits. "I was angry with them because I was afraid. They would invite me to break fast with them, but I refused because I didn't want to eat with them." He smiles, shaking his head at the memory.

"I remember the third day. They were all praying and I said to myself, 'What on earth am I doing here?' I was completely out of my comfort zone. And so it went on until one day I agreed to eat with them and began to talk with them. I saw they had sacrificed a lot to continue with their faith in Cuba," he says.
"I asked myself, 'Well, if they're so bad, how come they're being so good with me?' And so I began to talk with them more and realised Islam was something different to how the Cubans talked about it."
Once Ramadan ended, he resumed his regular job, but continued to see the students and began to read the Quran and to discuss it with them. 
Seven months later, he converted and changed his name.
"Allah showed me through the way they behaved that Islam was something else: Islam is peace, it's the will of God. Allah gave me the opportunity to understand that. It was a gift for me," he says with a broad smile.
Hassan's decision to convert initially created problems with his extended family.
"My family at first were against it. Because, like I said, it has a bad reputation. That's all people know. And it was difficult. There are still people in my family who don't accept that I've accepted Islam."
His wife was also hesitant at first. 
"I didn't want to convert because of the things people said - that they abused the women. But I read, I read a lot, I looked for books so that I could understand better," she says. She converted five months after her husband and changed her name to Shabana.
"At first I didn't wear the hijab because of people, because I was afraid of what people would say. But then after a year, it entered my heart and now I wear it and even here in the house I forget that I have it on."
Their children, Aina,16, and Ismael,12, also wear a headscarf and dishdasha.
"It's quite hard for my daughter at her age," Shabana says. "She's 16 and it's difficult for her at school. I just hope she meets a boyfriend, a man who is Muslim and who can help her. We'll see. As God wills."

Shabana Jan, left, who is photographed with her daughter Aina in their Santa Clara home, converted to Islam shortly after her husband embraced the religion [Carlo Bevilacqua/Parallelozero]
ALSO READ: Cuban Muslims celebrate Ramadan despite the obstacles
Being Muslim in Cuba
Links between the cultures of the Middle East and Cuba go back centuries.
Moors from Andalusia were brought as slaves by Spanish conquerors, with records of this dating back as early as 1593. Over the following centuries, both Muslim and Christian traders from the Middle East were drawn to Cuba by the wealth the sugar trade was generating. Many stayed, mostly in Havana or around Santiago de Cuba, the second-largest city at the far east of the island. Most Arab immigrants, both Muslim and Christian, gave up their religion once in Cuba.
Many brothers from other countries have said to me that we Cuban Muslims are the real Muslims, because it is so much harder to observe here than in a country where many people share the same beliefs and practices.
Hajji Isa, Cuban convert
Cuban culture today invariably poses challenges for the country's practising Muslims. Rum is one of the main items sold at cafes. It's a popular drink, not least because it costs significantly less than a soft drink. Pork features heavily in Cuban diets - it is the meat of choice for every celebration. Supermarkets have recently started importing halal chicken from Brazil, which is unaffordable for most Cubans. Clothes, such as the dishdasha or head-covering, have to be brought into the country or are left behind as gifts by Muslims from other countries.
"Many brothers from other countries have said to me that we Cuban Muslims are the real Muslims, because it is so much harder to observe here than in a country where many people share the same beliefs and practices," Isa says.
Hassan struggled in the beginning. 
"Food is difficult because everything's forbidden. The meat we eat most is pork, which is forbidden … And really there are a lot of temptations in the street. To be honest, it is a bit difficult, but Allah gives you the strength to go on," he says.
Since converting to Islam, Hassan and Shabana's lifestyle has changed completely, and is now centred on time spent at home.
"I'm very happy in my house, I'm quiet. I don't go out much," Shabana says.
"I go out if I need to get something, or to go to the doctors, but not because I want to be in the street," she says.

Home-run enterprises help bring locals in contact with members of Cuba's nascent Muslim community [Sylvia Hines/Al Jazeera]
ALSO READ: Between East and West: The Cold War's legacy in Africa
Perceptions about Islam
Cuba's converts also face challenges stemming from the lack of understanding that many Cubans have about Islam.
Media reports about terrorist attacks and conflict in the Middle East have shaped many Cubans' perception of the religion.
This is something Hajji Jamal is keen to change. 
He makes his living as a taxi driver in Santiago. Like many Cuban converts, he was raised Christian.
"I was a member of the Baptist church. I knew a lot about Christianity, but I could never really understand the Holy Trinity. Then I met a Cuban Muslim who'd been Muslim for many years, and started to talk with him about Islam. He gave me a Quran and said, 'Read this'. It took me a while, but then eventually I did read it and I could see a logic there, it seemed very sincere, very real and it was this which attracted me to Islam."
Jamal converted in 2009.
His mother, however, was appalled with his decision. Initially, she wanted him to leave the family home, but relented soon afterwards, allowing him to stay so long as none of his Muslim friends came into the house. When she saw Jamal and his friends standing outside in the sun she softened a little. She now invites them in for a meal.
"She still doesn't accept Islam, but the Muslims she knows yes, she welcomes them, prepares them food, everything," he says.
Jamal is an informal representative of Santiago's Muslim community of about 30 Cubans and 90 foreign students. He works with the authorities, whose presence is widespread with over 70 percent of the population working for the state, to increase their knowledge and understanding about Islam. 
"We're trying to give the best possible example of Islam, for at the moment there's a lot of negative messages in the media. People generalise, thinking, 'If you're Muslim, you must be a terrorist'."
He says: "Many are perverting the image of Islam. Islam is peace. So that is the message we are taking. Not because we expect people to convert, but so they can live comfortably together with Muslims."
Jamal says freedom of religion is respected under Cuban law.
"[Problems come] usually from authorities in small places who are interpreting the law in their own way. Because the law itself is clear - people can't be discriminated against by race, religion or colour," he says.
Some of the Cuban women converts who wear a headscarf have faced objections and discrimination from the authorities in their workplace or universities. According to Isa, such situations are usually resolved through discussion and explanations of what Islam is about. Shabana, however, says that for her "it got complicated" and she left her job. She now provides childcare at home for the son of a Muslim student.
She is reticent to talk about what happened at her former job. "It was just ignorance," is all she wants to say.
Shabana, like a number of Cuban converts, feels there's an active role for Muslims to play in increasing understanding among other Cubans about what Islam is.
"When I go out it's also good, people always ask about the headscarf and in answering their questions they learn something about Islam and that way people begin to adapt. So that they know what Islam is, that it isn't what people say," she says.

With no mosque in Santa Clara, Hassan and Shabana Jan have created a small prayer room in their home where Muslims in the area can come and pray [Sylvia Hines/Al Jazeera]
ALSO WATCH: People and Power - Cuba for Sale
Sport Café: Vegetarian pizzas and conversations about religion
Small businesses serving local communities play a role in generating conversations about Islam in Cuba.
Jorge Miguel Garcia, whose Muslim name is Khaled, is a part owner of a café in Santiago which is both an informal meeting place for the Muslim community and popular with non-Muslim Cubans.
Khaled converted to Islam from Baptism, and his wife of 20 years remains a Baptist.
He used to work in forensic medicine, but when the government enabled Cubans to start setting up small businesses he jumped at the opportunity.
Unlike other cafes, we don't serve alcohol and that's never been a problem.
Jorge Miguel Garcia, also known as Khaled, cafe owner
His initial idea was to import motorcycle parts, but with importing businesses not currently on the list of enterprises allowed in Cuba, he instead set up Sport Café with a non-Muslim friend. 
They sell dishes which include pork, but Khaled hopes one day to run the cafe completely in accordance with Islamic precepts. He believes it can still be a viable business.
"It's true that Cubans are very attached to pork products," he says, "but things are changing and people are more willing to try new dishes. Already I sell vegetarian pizzas, which you don't see elsewhere, and unlike other cafes, we don't serve alcohol and that's never been a problem."
For him, the café is a valuable, albeit unintentional, way of increasing Cubans' understanding of Islam.
"People who come for the first time always ask me about Islam and I like that, that they are interested. Many come back specifically because they see it as a healthy place where everyone is treated with respect. Those are the principles of Islam: peace, love and submission to Allah."

Jorge Miguel Garcia, whose Muslim name is Khaled, runs a cafe with a non-Muslim friend. The cafe is a space where Muslims can get together. He says many non-Muslim customers often end up asking questions about Islam, curious to know more about the religion [Sylvia Hines/Al Jazeera]
ALSO WATCH: My Cuba - Luis Silva: Being Panfilo
A community in the making
In 2015, a museum in Calle Oficios in Old Havana was turned into a prayer house with the support of the Office of the Historian, the body responsible for the restoration of central Havana.
It is the closest thing to a mosque that Cuba currently has and is where Muslims in Havana can go for Friday prayers. 
In other towns, the solutions are informal, with people setting up prayer rooms in their own homes.
Hassan and Shabana have a small, rug-filled space in their house where other Santa Clara Muslims come to pray.
"We don't have much to offer them," Shabana says, "but brothers and sisters are always welcome."
Jamal says a community prayer space for Muslims in Santiago is a priority.
As yet there is no approval, or funding, for a mosque. 
"We're building a small space, about 12 square metres, to pray in. Hopefully in the future - God willing - they'll let us build a proper mosque. That way we'll be able to interact as a community, learn from each other - it's always good to meet and learn from people in other countries."
Some support comes from outside. Saudi Arabia has funded language labs in both Havana and Santiago and in 2014 had a stand at the Havana Book Fair where literature about Islam and copies of the Quran in Spanish were distributed. King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, who died in January last year, sponsored five Cubans to make the Hajj pilgrimage in 2014. It's a near-impossible dream for most Cuban Muslims, with state employees earning around $20 a month.
Jamal and Isa were fortunate to be among the five.
"I never expected to go on Hajj so early," Jamal says.
"When I arrived at Jeddah, at the airport, the first thing I heard was the sound of prayer, and I began to cry," he recalls.
"Cuba has changed for sure," Jamal says. "But for me things will really have changed when we're allowed to build our own mosque, our own centre of studies - to have the same privileges that other religions have. When women can wear the veil without any problems. Those will be the real changes."
This story is part of the My Cuba series. More stories from the series can be read here.

@irvindzhang
HAVANA, Cuba – In a small living room in central Havana, a group of Cubans crammed together with Pakistani medical students to practice Islam. As the fan oscillated in a simple space, the students shared their experiences back home as they prayed and read the Quran.
 
Samir Medina, a Cuban convert who practiced with the Pakistani immigrants, said the ad hoc worship reminded him of how the small community got its start in the capital 13 years ago.
 
In response to the deadly Kashmir earthquake in Pakistan, the Cuban government offered 1,000 Pakistanis refuge in 2005. The majority of those who immigrated to Cuba studied medicine throughout the island.
 
“They were doctors here and they spread out over all of Cuba, from Guantanamo to Isla de la Juventud,” said Medina, who is in charge of opening the call to prayer —a ritual that takes place five times a day depending on where the sun is in the sky. He spoke through a translator.
 
“They had a big impact. They prosthelytize a lot. They would convert Muslims in their provinces and open homes in the provinces they went to.”
 
Though many of those Pakistani students returned home, they left behind the foundation for a community that’s since grown. In 2005, there were 500 Muslims in Havana, according to Pedro Lazo Yahya, the president of the Cuban Islamic League. That number grew every year, and in 2015, Saudi Arabia provided the Cuban government funding to build a mosque over an antique car museum in Old Havana. Yahya said he couldn’t disclose the amount.

Pedro Lazo Yahya, 68, serves as the president of the Cuban Islamic League and has been practicing Islam for 38 years, making him one of the longest practicing Muslims in Havana. (Photo by Riley Robinson/The GroundTruth Project)
The number of Muslims on the island has now reached 7,000 – indicative of a religious congregation that’s firmly established and steadily rising.
 
Underneath a small green and white minaret, the one-story mosque, named Mezquita Abdallah, resembles a colonial style box more than the traditional sweeping architectures mosques are known for. It was opened in 2015 on the first day of Ramadan, Islam’s ninth and holiest month.

Muslim men gather under the Arabic word meaning ‘praise Allah and his mercy’ for their evening prayer, otherwise known as Maghrib. (Photo by Riley Robinson/The GroundTruth Project)
Yahya sat in a white, plastic chair in the mosque’s foyer area on a recent Tuesday evening, just past the mosque’s large wooden double-doors, exhausted from another long day of
 
fasting. The mosque was halfway through celebrating its third Ramadan. Yahya scanned the room as people shuffled in and out, preparing for evening prayer. After 38 years as a Muslim, he said he is proud of how far this community has come.
 
Cuban converts make up 4,000 of the 7,000 Muslims in the city. The mosque’s establishment contributed to the shift in majority, Yahya said.
 
“There were a lot of foreigners but it was the native Cubans who now organize this community,” he said, through a translator. “Now there’s more visibility. People can take more interest.”
 
Prior to the mosque’s construction, Muslims gathered in designated homes called masalas to practice, including Casa de los Arabes. It is among the most popular and served as the provisional place of worship for 22 years, said Yahya, who owns it. 
 
The impromptu worship house sits directly across the street from the mosque.
 
“It was like coming to the mosque,” said Muhammad Giovanni Vazquez Pardo, a Cuban convert of 24 years, through a translator. “His house was without a lot of ostentatiousness. It was simple: a couch, an armchair, a rug. You just do your prayer on the floor or even outside in the open air.”
 
It became a holy house, but it was small — about 20 feet long, Medina said. So small that when more Cubans began converting, the house didn’t have enough space for them.
 
The need reached its peak during the final day of Ramadan in 2014 when 600 Muslims prayed on a concrete floor in a park near the aquarium in west Havana. Yahya said it was the only space nearby big enough for all of them and described the scene as a “sea of men and women adoring god.”
 
The unity of today’s greater Muslim congregation is a recent development. Soleymon Mustafa, who has practiced Islam for five years, recalls a time when he thought he was the only Muslim in Havana.
 
“I thought I was crazy because I thought no one else was a Muslim and I would practice alone in my house,” said Mustafa, who began practicing Islam on his own. “One day, I was walking on the street and I saw one of the brothers who’s here today and he was just a man with a long white beard and I asked him, ‘are you Muslim?’ That’s how I found out about this community because I didn’t think there was a community before.”

Soleymon Mustafa began reading scripture and practicing Islam on his own. He recalls a time when he thought he was the only Muslim in Cuba because he didn’t know about the community. (Photo by Riley Robinson/The GroundTruth Project)
Islam is still small in Cuba, making up only 7,000 people — .01 percent of the 11.2 million-person population, Yahya said. The majority of Cubans identify as some form of Christian, with 60 percent identifying as Catholic and 5 percent identifying as Protestant, according to a 2016 report done by the U.S. State Department. The report estimates that 13 percent of people identify as someone who practices Santeria, a religion rooted in West African practices. But numbers aren’t clear because the religion is “commonly intermingled with Catholicism.”
 
The recent growth of this community came with growing pains. Isqura Arudin, 33, said she was told she couldn’t teach if she wore a hijab, a traditional Muslim veil worn by women.
 
“One day they told me that I had to leave, and I asked ‘but why?’ And they said ‘you are Muslim and with that thing on your head, you can’t work in Cuba.’ And I had to leave my job,” Arudin, a Cuban convert of two years, said in Spanish through a translator.
 
She got her job back after threatening to take her case to court.
 
Cuban Muslims have not been immune to misconceptions and stereotypes, either. Yusuf Ali, 26, works as a demolitionist who helps tear down buildings. While at work, he has been asked questions that associate Islam with violence.
 
“If I’m working on a house, a lot of times, it comes out with food,” Ali said through a translator. “They’ll offer me pork, I’ll say no. They’ll ask if it’s because of an illness and I’ll say it’s because of my faith, I’m a Muslim. They’ll confront me and ask me, ‘Oh aren’t Muslims violent, aren’t they terrorists?’”
 
Seated in a circle among their fellow Muslims on the brown carpet that covers the entire room Ali and Arudin said these stories are abnormal for the greater community. They said they believe most Cubans are welcoming of Muslims.

Yusuf Ali, 26, has been a practicing Muslim for two years. While working as a demolitionist, he said he’s been confronted by misconceptions about his religion, with one person asking him if he’s a terrorist. (Photo by Riley Robinson/The GroundTruth Project)
Leonel Diez Sterling, a Yemeni-Cuban and a third-generation Cuban Muslim, said he believes Cuban society has grown to accept its diverse religious populations.
 
“Maybe every once in a while, there will be an individual that will want to discriminate, but it’s not a societal problem,” Sterling, 77, said through a translator. “If you want to practice Islam, go ahead. If you want to practice Catholicism, go ahead. Even if you practice Santeria, you can practice Santeria. It’s your own business.”
 
Above two large calligraphic paintings meaning ‘praise God and his mercy’ and ‘Allah,’ the the Imam sang the call to prayer at 8:20 p.m., signaling to the congregation it was time for Maghrib, the evening service. Quickly, around 250 Muslims took off their shoes, funneled in through the large glass doors from the foyer and found a place near the Imam to begin. The fasting for the day had come to an end.
 
The men cycled back and forth between the foyer and the large worship rooms, bringing plastic, white tables and chairs for the evening dinner service, during which rice and beans are typically served with potatoes, salad and lamb or chicken.
 
The one-story mosque holds enough space for daily prayers, but as the congregation continues to grow, a more spacious mosque will be required, Yahya said.
 
Sterling said he remembers showing up “a little bit late” on the final day of 2017’s Ramadan and having to perform his prayers near the entrance of the mosque because there wasn’t any room left on floor. Mustafa, who arrived after Sterling on that day, had to stand in the cobblestone street.
 
“When I first started coming here, the mosque was only half full. But this past Ramadan, there were so many people, I had to pray in the street,” Mustafa said.
 
According to Yahya, Cuba and Saudi Arabia have laid out a plot of land equivalent to a large park for a new mosque near the western Bay of Havana, along the Fabrica, a main street in southern Havana. He said that negotiations are still ongoing and no timetable has been set but he “expects it in short time.”
 
As Ali sat next to the Cuban friend and Muslim who converted him, he said Cubans have become the majority of the country’s Muslim population because they’ve taken on the role of spreading Islam to other Cubans, a role that used to be shared with immigrants. Even Ali, a younger convert of just two years, knows the impact they’ve had on the community.
 
“The first group of immigrants that came were the Pakistanis,” Ali said. “They were the first to have a migration here for education and join our community. After them, a lot more other groups started coming.”
 
While Medina sat underneath a large Arabic calligraphic painting that said ‘God is great,’ he recalled his experiences practicing with the Pakistani immigrants and laughed.
 
“Pakistanis, wherever they go, they place a mosque,” Medina said with a smile. “Mosques and businesses —mosques and businesses.”
 
This story is part of a series exploring the growing role of faith during a time of transformation, produced in partnership with Northeastern University and with support from the Henry Luce Foundation. 
More from this Project